Q) What is Polymorphism?

Polymorphism naturally flows from abstraction.

Abstraction hides implementation details from the caller by exposing a common interface.

Polymorphism allows different concrete classes to provide their own implementation of that interface.

Instead of using if/else or switch to decide which implementation to call, we can call the method through the common interface.

At runtime, the actual object's type determines which overridden method is invoked.

Example:

PaymentMethod* payment = new CreditCardPayment();

payment->process(100);

The caller only knows about PaymentMethod, but at runtime,
CreditCardPayment::process() is invoked.

If the object were UPIPayment, then UPIPayment::process() would be invoked instead.


Key idea:
Same interface / method call → different behavior depending on the actual object.

Advice:
Use polymorphism when behavior varies by type. If you see yourself writing type checks or switch statements on an enum, that's a sign you should be using polymorphism instead.

Caution:

Polymorphism improves flexibility and extensibility, but excessive use can make code flow harder to trace and debug because the actual implementation may be spread across multiple classes.

Use it when the benefits of interchangeable/extensible implementations outweigh the added indirection.


Q) virtual
virtual
→ This function can be overridden in a derived class.

= 0
→ This makes the function pure virtual.
→ A class with at least one pure virtual function is abstract.

virtual does NOT require = 0.
→ virtual functions can have an implementation.

virtual
→ When called through a base pointer/reference, C++ can use
  runtime dispatch to call the implementation belonging to the
  actual object.

Q) Virtual destructor → when deleting a derived object through a base pointer, the derived destructor is called correctly, followed by the base destructor.

Q) Use override in a derived class when overriding a virtual function, whether the base function is pure virtual or has a default implementation.